.. raw:: latex

   \setcounter{secnumdepth}{-1}

Acknowledgments
***************

This book is the culmination of so many lectures, books, discussions,
conferences, *etc.* that it is impossible to provide a full accounting
to all the people who've had an impact on the book.  Undoubtedly,
there are people I've failed to mention here and I apologize in
advance if I've left anyones name off this list.

Technical
=========

On the subject of Modelica, the primary acknowledgment has to be to
Hilding Elmqvist for not only having the technical vision to recognize
the potential of symbolic manipulation techniques could have on the
solution of dynamic systems but having the leadership to push this
vision forward as an open standard.  Hilding is the undisputed "father
of Modelica" and he deserves considerable credit for all that Modelica
has become.

Second only to Hilding is Martin Otter, a man who has worked
tirelessly for the advancement of Modelica.  I can honestly say that
Martin works harder than anybody else I know.  He has not only made
countless technical contributions to Modelica, but he's taken on the
unenviable and generally thankless task of managing the Modelica
Association.  It is important to remember that having great technical
ideas is by no means a recipe for success.  Somebody has to be there
to push and push and push those ideas along.  I'd like to thank Martin
for all his hard work in making the Modelica Association what it is
today.

Of course, Martin isn't alone in running the Modelica Association.
The Modelica Association Board and the Members are also extremely
important for raising awareness about Modelica.  In the end, the
Modelica Association is an organization committed to open standards to
support engineering and I'd like to thank all the members for their
hard work in this regard.

There wasn't always a Modelica Association, but there was always a
Modelica Design Group.  These are the people who come together several
times a year and work on continuously improving the Modelica language.
It is astounding how much energy has been poured into this effort.
I'd like to thank all those people who've participated in the
development of the Modelica Language and the Modelica Standard
Library.

Personal
========

On a personal note, I am forever indebted to my mother, my father, my
wife, my kids and my in-laws for their endless support of my passion
for science, engineering and math.  They are responsible for
cultivating and sustaining my interests in these topics so I owe all
the energy and time I'm able to apply to projects like this one to
them.

I'd also like to thank Dietmar Winkler for the many discussions we had
on alternative publishing models.  We would frequently discuss the
ideas of people like Cory Doctorow and Lawrence Lessig and how their
ideas could be applied to create more accessible content.

Looking back, I feel very fortunate to have worked for several
companies that supported my involvement in Modelica.  I first got
involved with Modelica while I was working at Ford Motor Company and I
was fortunate that they were willing to sponsor my participation in
many different Modelica related events.  After Ford, I went to work at
Emmeskay (eventually acquired by LMS).  I benefited enormously from
the interactions I had with my Emmeskay family.  In particular, I'd
like to thank my partners, Swami Gopalswamy and Shiva Shivashankar for
giving me the opportunity to be part of Emmeskay and for being great
friends.  It was a privilege to work with Michael Sasena and John
Batteh on several Modelica related projects.  Emmeskay was an
incredible company and this was entirely a reflection on the great
group of people who worked there.  Finally, I'd like to thank Dassault
Systèmes for giving me the opportunity to work with all the excellent
people there as well.  In particular, I'd like to thank Hilding
Elmqvist and Marc Frouin for encouraging me to come work there.  I'd
also like to thank Martin Malmheden, Dag Brück and Sandrine Loembe
during my excellent year in Paris.

Contributors
============

This project was really an experiment to see if the Kickstarter
approach could to publishing could be applied to a niche technical
field like Modelica.  I was pleasantly surprised to see that it could
and that this project had enough support to be funded.  For that
reason, I'd like to thank the backers of the Kickstarter project (and
the corporate sponsors in particular) for coming together to achieve
are mutual goal of creating more quality educational material around
Modelica.  Literally, this project could not have happened without
them.

The Kickstarter funding allowed me to commit time to this project, but
I also had several people helping me on this project.  First and
foremost, I'd like to once again thank my father who helped proof-read
the initial draft of this book.  Proof-reading is a necessary but
rather boring job so I think he deserves extract credit for making
that sacrifice.  Similarly, I'd like to thank Dietmar Winkler and
Michael O'Keefe for providing additional feedback on the book
content.  Dietmar has also helped me test publishing issues related to
supporting ePub and PDF formats.

I'd like to thank Jeff Waters for being the "voice of the sponsor".  I
had several very productive discussions with Jeff during the course of
writing this book to make sure that the layout and graphical design
lived up to sponsors' expectations.

Tools
=====

Building a book like this requires a lot of different tools.  My
productivity was amplified enormously.

Sphinx - 

OpenModelica - 
Martin Sjoelund - 

Emscripten - 
Tom Smart - 

Git - 
Dietmar Winkler

Emacs - 

Dymola, MapleSoft, SystemModeler, SimulationX

MacBookAir - 

iTerm2 - 

Firefox - 

Chrome - 

.. raw:: latex

   \setcounter{secnumdepth}{2}


