.. raw:: latex

   \setcounter{secnumdepth}{-1}

Dedication
**********

This book started as a Kickstarter project.  The idea of writing a
book and making it freely available, under a Creative Commons license,
was largely inspired by the writings of Cory Doctorow and Lawrence
Lessig.  Their message of sharing resonated very strongly with me.
The Kickstarter project was successfully funded on December 4th, 2012
and my odyssey to create an entire Creative Commons licensed book
began.  If circumstances had been different, this book would probably
be dedicated to them for inspiring me to take on this project.

But this book isn't dedicated to Cory Doctorow or Lawrence Lessig.
Instead, it is dedicated to **Aaron Swartz**.  At the age of 14, Aaron
participated in the development of the RSS standard.  He went on to
start his own company, Infogami, that was eventually acquired by
Reddit.  Along the way, he worked on the Creative Commons License and
fought against Internet censorship.  He was altruistic and cared
deeply about technology and the future of mankind.  We was more
concerned with accumulating knowledge than he was with accumulating
wealth.  He had countless qualities that I admire and aspire to.  He
was both brilliant and successful and he had a passion for spreading
information, protecting online freedoms and fighting Internet
censorship.  But on January 11th, 2013, **Aaron Swartz took his own
life**.

Barely a month after the successful funding of this Kickstarter
project, Aaron Swartz was dead at the age of 26.  It is astounding
what Aaron managed to accomplish in his young life and it makes his
death all the more tragic to think of all the good he could have done
with the rest of his life.  He was driven to take his own life because
he was facing federal charges that could have put him in prison for up
to 50 years and cost him one million dollars in fines.  Because his
life has been chronicled by better writers who actually knew him, I
won't go into detail about Aaron's case except to say that as a
business owner, a researcher and a U. S. citizen I am thoroughly
outraged by the way he was bullied by federal prosecutors determined
to make an example of him.  Their motivations were not driven by an
obligation to protect and serve the citizens of the United States but
rather to make an example of someone who fought against broken
business models that tried to profit from holding knowledge hostage.
He was not a threat to anyone except antiquated and outmoded business
models determined to remain gatekeepers over the exchange of academic
knowledge.

This book is dedicated to Aaron Swartz in an attempt to keep his
memory and, more importantly, the things he stood for alive.  Over a
year has past since he died and now seems an appropriate time to
remind everyone not just of all the things he did for the common good,
but also the misdeeds of Carmen Ortiz and the U. S. Attorney General's
office in pursuing him.

.. raw:: latex

   \setcounter{secnumdepth}{2}
